docs: Add Space deploy recipe and logo (#2826)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/deploy/space.mdx

## Prerequisite

To push an Astro site to Space, make sure you first:

- Create a [Space account](https://deta.space).
- Install the [Space CLI](https://deta.space/docs/en/basics/cli) and log in.

Create a Space project **inside** the directory of your Astro project. Run the CLI and follow the instructions on the screen.    

```bash
space new
```

:::note
The Space CLI will try to auto-detect the configuration for your app. Accept the suggested configuration and then follow the instructions below, depending on the type of Astro app you want to deploy.
:::

## Project Configuration

### Static site

Make the following changes to the `Spacefile` file at the root of your project generated by the Space CLI. 
	
	1. Change the engine to `static`.
	2. Add Astro's build command to the list of `commands`.
	3. Serve the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 

```yaml title="Spacefile" "static" "- npm run build" "serve: dist"
# Spacefile Docs: https://go.deta.dev/docs/spacefile/v0
v: 0
micros:
  - name: static-astro-in-space
    src: .
    engine: static
    commands:
      - npm run build
    serve: dist
```

> ### Server-side rendering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Server-side rendered site
```
change for consistency

---
title: Deploy your Astro Site to Space
description: How to build an Astro site in Space.
type: deploy
i18nReady: true
---
import InstallGuideTabGroup from '~/components/TabGroup/InstallGuideTabGroup.astro';
import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro'

[Deta Space](https://deta.space/developers) is a personal computer that lives in the cloud — a ‘personal cloud’. You can build and run apps for yourself in your own "Space". You can publish the apps you've built, and they'll run for people all around the world. 

> You can also install apps published by other devs. You'll get a personal copy of the app in your own cloud, running on your own infrastructure. All the data that all these apps save to your Space is for you: to explore, to extend, and to export, if you like.

Reviewer 2: Nit: avoid multiple "own" in the same sentence.
```suggestion
You can also install apps published by other devs. You'll get a personal copy of the app in your own cloud, running on your infrastructure. All the data that all these apps save to your Space is for you: to explore, to extend, and to export, if you like.
```

> This guide includes step-by-step instructions for building sites in Space. You can build any type of Astro sites in Space: either a static site or a server-rendered site.

Reviewer 2: Typo: `sites` -> `site`
```suggestion
This guide includes step-by-step instructions for building sites in Space. You can build any type of Astro site in Space: either a static site or a server-rendered site.
```

## Prerequisite

To push an Astro site to Space, make sure you first:

- Create a [Space account](https://deta.space)
- Install the [Space CLI](https://deta.space/docs/en/basics/cli) and log in

No matter the type of Astro site you are building, create a Space project **inside** the directory of your Astro project. Run the CLI and follow the instructions on the screen.    

```bash
space new
```

:::note

> The Space CLI might prompt you with the `nodejs16` engine configuration. You may accept or disregard the recommendation, we will guide you through both options.

Reviewer 3: Felt like this was a bit unclear. Simplified it by saying you should just accept the suggestions and follow the instructions.

```suggestion
The Space CLI will try to detect the right configuration for your app. Accept the suggested configuration and follow the instructions below on how to configure it for your Astro app.
```

Author: I like this way much better, thank you for the clarificaiton

:::

> 
> ## Static site

Reviewer 3: Moved the configuration steps into its own section since we now also have the "How to deploy" section. 

```suggestion

## Project Configuration

### Static site
```

If you build a simple Astro site with no adapters, you don’t need any extra configuration to your Astro project. 

> Edit the `Spacefile` file generated by the Space CLI on the root of your project. You will configure the `nodejs16` engine, add the `build` command, and serve the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 

Reviewer 3: Clarification.

```suggestion
Edit the `Spacefile` file generated by the Space CLI on the root of your project. You will need to change the engine to `static`, add the `build` command, and serve the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 
```

> Edit the `Spacefile` file generate by the Space CLI on the root of your project. You will configure the `nodejs16` engine, add the `build` command, and serve the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 

Reviewer 2: Typo: `generate` -> `generated`
```suggestion
Edit the `Spacefile` file generated by the Space CLI on the root of your project. You will configure the `nodejs16` engine, add the `build` command, and serve the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 
```

```yaml title="Spacefile"
# Spacefile Docs: https://go.deta.dev/docs/spacefile/v0
v: 0
micros:
  - name: static-astro-in-space
    src: .
    engine: static
    commands:
      - npm run build
    serve: dist
```

> ## Server-side rendering

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Server-side rendering
```

:::caution
When migrating from a static site to a server-rendered site, make sure you make all the proper adjustments based on the type of Astro site you are building. There are bits of configuration sprinkled around the documentation worth checking, but it's not limited to:

- [Dynamic routes for SSR](https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/routing/#server-ssr-mode)
- [Modifying the `[...slug]` example for SSR](https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/routing/#modifying-the-slug-example-for-ssr)
- [Building the content collections for SSR](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/#building-for-server-output-ssr)
:::

Edit the `Spacefile` to configure the `nodejs16` engine, add the `build` command, include the `dist` directory generated by Astro, and run the `node` command.

```yaml title="Spacefile"
# Spacefile Docs: https://go.deta.dev/docs/spacefile/v0
v: 0
micros:
  - name: ssr-astro-in-space
    src: .
    engine: nodejs16
    commands:
      - npm run build
    include:
      - dist
    run: "node ./dist/server/entry.mjs"
```

> 

Reviewer 3: To actually get your Astro app running on Space you need to push your project. Added a new section on how to do that.

````suggestion

## How to deploy

Once you have your project setup the only thing left to do is push your project to Space:

```bash
space push
```

This will run the build process and create a new [Space app instance](https://deta.space/docs/en/basics/revisions#testing-changes) where you can access your Astro app.

By default Space apps are private and are only accessible to you. If you want to make your app available to others you can use [Public Routes](https://deta.space/docs/en/reference/spacefile#public_routes) to make parts of your app public or you can [create a release](https://deta.space/docs/en/basics/releases) to let others install your app into their own personal cloud.

````

## Next steps

> - [Configure the public routes of your Space project](https://deta.space/docs/en/reference/spacefile#public_routes)

Reviewer 3: Since we mention public routes above we don't need to mention it again here.

```suggestion

```

---
title: Deploy your Astro Site to Space
description: How to build an Astro site in Space.
type: deploy
i18nReady: true
---
import InstallGuideTabGroup from '~/components/TabGroup/InstallGuideTabGroup.astro';
import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro'

[Deta Space](https://deta.space/developers) is a personal computer that lives in the cloud — a ‘personal cloud’. You can build and run apps for yourself in your own "Space". You can publish the apps you've built, and they'll run for people all around the world. 

You can also install apps published by other devs. You'll get a personal copy of the app in your own cloud, running on your infrastructure. All the data that all these apps save to your Space is for you: to explore, to extend, and to export, if you like.

> This guide includes step-by-step instructions for building sites in Space. You can build any type of Astro site in Space: either a static site or a server-rendered site.

Reviewer 4: Agreed!

> This guide includes step-by-step instructions for building sites in Space. You can build any type of Astro site in Space: either a static site or a server-rendered site.

Author: Yeah got too excited here ahahah

## Prerequisite

To push an Astro site to Space, make sure you first:

- Create a [Space account](https://deta.space)
- Install the [Space CLI](https://deta.space/docs/en/basics/cli) and log in

> No matter the type of Astro site you are building, create a Space project **inside** the directory of your Astro project. Run the CLI and follow the instructions on the screen.    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Space project **inside** the directory of your Astro project. Run the CLI and follow the instructions on the screen.    
```
The beauty is, when your instructions work for all options, you don't even have to say so! It's just the instruction!

Reviewer 4: agree 100%

```bash
space new
```

:::note

> The Space CLI will try to detect the right configuration for your app. Accept the suggested configuration and follow the instructions below on how to configure it for your Astro app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Space CLI will try to detect the right configuration for your app. Accept the suggested configuration, then follow the instructions below for configuring your project.
```
It's not often I get to throw a YouTube link in a PR comment, but this is one of my all time faves and I feel like you'll take this in the spirit in which it was intended!  :joy: https://youtu.be/Jtq1EBMe1gQ?t=96

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Space CLI will try to auto-detect the configuration for your app. Accept the suggested configuration and then follow the instructions below, depending on the type of Astro app you want to deploy.
```

Haha -- now that you mention it, there is three forms of "configure" there. Perhaps something like the above?

Author: Ahahahah @sarah11918 good illustration

Reviewer: I'm down with @xeust's suggestion here!

## Project Configuration

### Static site

If you build a simple Astro site with no adapters, you don’t need any extra configuration to your Astro project. 

Edit the `Spacefile` file generated by the Space CLI on the root of your project. You will need to change the engine to `static`, add the `build` command, and serve the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 

> ```yaml title="Spacefile" "static" "- npm run build" "serve:dist"

Reviewer 5: The `serve:dist` is missing a space for the highlight to work:

```suggestion
```yaml title="Spacefile" "static" "- npm run build" "serve: dist"
```

> If you build a simple Astro site with no adapters, you don’t need any extra configuration to your Astro project. 
> 
> Edit the `Spacefile` file generated by the Space CLI on the root of your project. You will need to change the engine to `static`, add the `build` command, and serve the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make the following changes to the `Spacefile` file at the root of your project generated by the Space CLI. 

1. Change the engine to `static`.
2. Add the `build` command.
3. Serve the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 
```
So, to avoid calling more than half of Astro sites "simple" ... :sweat_smile: 

If no configuration to the Astro project itself is needed, let's just not say it! They won't even know it's missing!

Also, since we're at *three* changes to this file to make, it might make sense to list them out vs one long sentence. Also, I'll let @Jutanium weigh in here, because these instructions tell you what to do (e.g. serve the `dist` directory) in broad terms, but they really need the code example included to get it done. 

Right now, I'm thinking it's OK that the instructions read like general descriptions of what you're doing instead of telling you the exact code to write, with the example showing how to write the code that accomplishes it right there below. But, this is something Dan and I do think about carefully and I could be convinced by him that even the instructions should be more explicit.

Author: Right, totally agreed here. 

But I do think the combination of general instructions + the code snippet below works in terms with what you described here. 

The `change` in step one comes from the initially generated `Spacefile` (see `The Space CLI will try to detect the right configuration for your app.`), which might or might not be good, I didn't think we should mention it. Do you think we need a richer example or code snippet here?

Author: I am 100% for the list, good point 🤘🏼

Reviewer 5: Agreed that the list does not have to contain everything you need to make the changes - the code sample does the work.
That said, I think we should match it with the terminology used in the code sample:

```suggestion
Make the following changes to the `Spacefile` file at the root of your project generated by the Space CLI. 
	
	1. Change the engine to `static`.
	2. Add Astro's build command to the list of `commands`.
	3. Serve the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 
```

Reviewer: Approve, Dan! Let's ship this version!

> ```yaml title="Spacefile"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml title="Spacefile" "static" "- npm run build" "serve:dist"
```
Giving us some fancy code highlighting here!

<PackageManagerTabs>
  <Fragment slot="npm">
  ```shell
  npx astro add node
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="yarn">
  ```shell
  yarn astro add node
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="pnpm">
  ```shell
  pnpm astro add node
  ```
  </Fragment>
</PackageManagerTabs>

If you need to further configure the adapter, please follow the [`@astrojs/node` documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/).

:::caution
When migrating from a static site to a server-rendered site, make sure you make all the proper adjustments based on the type of Astro site you are building. There are bits of configuration sprinkled around the documentation worth checking, but it's not limited to:

- [Dynamic routes for SSR](https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/routing/#server-ssr-mode)
- [Modifying the `[...slug]` example for SSR](https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/routing/#modifying-the-slug-example-for-ssr)
- [Building the content collections for SSR](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/#building-for-server-output-ssr)

> :::

Reviewer: I'm going to also consult with @Jutanium on this one. My thinking is that someone already HAS either an SSG or SSR site, and is just needing to know how to deploy it. I'm not sure someone would actually be converting their site *at this stage of the game*.

But, I love what you wrote about migrating to SSR, and I'm not even sure WE have that in our docs in exactly this way? :smile: We may nix it from here, but actually make this its own recipe!

Author: > My thinking is that someone already HAS either an SSG or SSR site, and is just needing to know how to deploy it. I'm not sure someone would actually be converting their site at this stage of the game.

Yess, I am the same here. Got major mixed feelings about this as well (still do). Happy to chime in the conversation if needed 🙌🏼

Reviewer 5: Let's remove this, and move the discussion [here](https://github.com/withastro/docs/issues/2792#issuecomment-1472428182).

```suggestion
If you wish to use [server-side rendering (SSR)](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-side-rendering/) in your Astro project, you will need to install the [`@astrojs/node`](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/) adapter first. 

<PackageManagerTabs>
  <Fragment slot="npm">
  ```shell
  npx astro add node
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="yarn">
  ```shell
  yarn astro add node
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="pnpm">
  ```shell
  pnpm astro add node
  ```
  </Fragment>
</PackageManagerTabs>

If you need to further configure the adapter, please follow the [`@astrojs/node` documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/).
```

Reviewer 5: Also, it might be worth explicitly saying that Space _only_ works with Node. That's inferred here, but it's worth being more clear.

> Edit the `Spacefile` to configure the `nodejs16` engine, add the `build` command, include the `dist` directory generated by Astro, and run the `node` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make the following changes to the `Spacefile` file at the root of your project generated by the Space CLI:

1. Configure the `nodejs16` engine.
2. Add the `build` command.
3. Include the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 
4. Run the node command.
```
What if we try the same strategy here?

Reviewer 4: Makes sense!

> ```yaml title="Spacefile"

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```yaml title="Spacefile" "nodejs16" "- npm run build" "- dist" "run: 'node ./dist/server/entry.mjs"'
````
MOAR highlighting!

# Spacefile Docs: https://go.deta.dev/docs/spacefile/v0
v: 0
micros:
  - name: ssr-astro-in-space
    src: .
    engine: nodejs16
    commands:
      - npm run build
    include:
      - dist
    run: "node ./dist/server/entry.mjs"
```

## How to deploy

> Once you have your project setup the only thing left to do is push your project to Space:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy your project with the following command:
```
I know, I'm boring.

```bash
space push
```

This will run the build process and create a new [Space app instance](https://deta.space/docs/en/basics/revisions#testing-changes) where you can access your Astro app.

By default Space apps are private and are only accessible to you. If you want to make your app available to others you can use [Public Routes](https://deta.space/docs/en/reference/spacefile#public_routes) to make parts of your app public or you can [create a release](https://deta.space/docs/en/basics/releases) to let others install your app into their own personal cloud.

## Next steps

> - [Add more compute to your Space project](https://deta.space/docs/en/basics/micros)

Reviewer 4: Yeah, you're right, but something like "computing power" or "computing services" feels like a mouthful 😅

But after looking, I guess we're not the only ones: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/pricing/calculator/

> - [Add more compute to your Space project](https://deta.space/docs/en/basics/micros)

Reviewer 5: Space calls it compute, so we should too!

---
title: Deploy your Astro Site to Space
description: How to build an Astro site in Space.
type: deploy
i18nReady: true
---
import InstallGuideTabGroup from '~/components/TabGroup/InstallGuideTabGroup.astro';
import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro'

[Deta Space](https://deta.space/developers) is a personal computer that lives in the cloud — a ‘personal cloud’. You can build and run apps for yourself in your own "Space". You can publish the apps you've built, and they'll run for people all around the world.

> This guide includes step-by-step instructions for building sites in Space. Both static and server-side rendered Astro sites are supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide includes step-by-step instructions for building sites in Space. Both static and server-side rendered (with the [`@astrojs/node` adapter](/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/)) Astro sites are supported.
```

## Prerequisite

To push an Astro site to Space, make sure you first:

- Create a [Space account](https://deta.space).
- Install the [Space CLI](https://deta.space/docs/en/basics/cli) and log in.

Create a Space project **inside** the directory of your Astro project. Run the CLI and follow the instructions on the screen.    

```bash
space new
```

:::note
The Space CLI will try to auto-detect the configuration for your app. Accept the suggested configuration and then follow the instructions below, depending on the type of Astro app you want to deploy.
:::

## Project Configuration

### Static site

Make the following changes to the `Spacefile` file at the root of your project generated by the Space CLI. 
	
	1. Change the engine to `static`.
	2. Add Astro's build command to the list of `commands`.
	3. Serve the `dist` directory generated by Astro. 

```yaml title="Spacefile" "static" "- npm run build" "serve: dist"
# Spacefile Docs: https://go.deta.dev/docs/spacefile/v0
v: 0
micros:
  - name: static-astro-in-space
    src: .
    engine: static
    commands:
      - npm run build
    serve: dist
```

### Server-side rendering

> If you wish to use [server-side rendering (SSR)](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-side-rendering/) in your Astro project, you will need to install the [`@astrojs/node`](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/) adapter first. 
> 
> <PackageManagerTabs>
>   <Fragment slot="npm">
>   ```shell
>   npx astro add node
>   ```
>   </Fragment>
>   <Fragment slot="yarn">
>   ```shell
>   yarn astro add node
>   ```
>   </Fragment>
>   <Fragment slot="pnpm">
>   ```shell
>   pnpm astro add node
>   ```
>   </Fragment>
> </PackageManagerTabs>
> 
> If you need to further configure the adapter, please follow the [`@astrojs/node` documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/).
> 
> :::caution
> When migrating from a static site to a server-rendered site, make sure you make all the proper adjustments based on the type of Astro site you are building. There are bits of configuration sprinkled around the documentation worth checking, but it's not limited to:
> 
> - [Dynamic routes for SSR](https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/routing/#server-ssr-mode)
> - [Modifying the `[...slug]` example for SSR](https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/routing/#modifying-the-slug-example-for-ssr)
> - [Building the content collections for SSR](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/#building-for-server-output-ssr)
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
